README.md, before:

# Docker image for QGIS server

## Usage

The Docker container needs to have access to all files of the QGIS project to be published.
Either you create another image to add the files or you inject them using a volume.
For example, if your QGIS project is stored in `./qgis/project.qgz`:

```bash
docker run --detach --publish=8380:80 --volume=${PWD}/qgis:/etc/qgisserver camptocamp/qgis-server
```

With the previous command, you'll get to your server with this URL:
http://localhost:8380/?MAP=/etc/qgisserver/project.qgz&SERVICE=WMS&REQUEST=GetCapabilities

## Apache Tunings

You can use the following variables (`-e` option in `docker run`):

- `QGIS_CATCH_SEGV`: Set to `1` if you want stacktraces in the logs in case of segmentation faults by running `tail -f /var/log/qgis.log` in the container
- `FCGID_MAX_REQUESTS_PER_PROCESS`: The number of requests a QGIS server will serve before being restarted by apache
- `FCGID_MIN_PROCESSES`: The minimum number of fcgi processes to keep (defaults to `1`)
- `FCGID_MAX_PROCESSES`: The maximum number of fcgi processes to keep (defaults to `5`)
- `FCGID_IO_TIMEOUT`: This is the maximum period of time the module will wait while trying to read from or
  write to a FastCGI application (default is `40`)
- `FCGID_BUSY_TIMEOUT`: The maximum time limit for request handling (defaults to `300`)
- `FCGID_IDLE_TIMEOUT`: Application processes which have not handled a request for
  this period of time will be terminated (defaults to `300`)
- `FILTER_ENV`: Filter the environment variables with e.g.:
  `| grep -vi _SERVICE_ | grep -vi _TCP | grep -vi _UDP | grep -vi _PORT` to remove the default
  Kubernetes environment variables (default in an empty string)
- `GET_ENV`: alternative to `FILTER_ENV`, a command that return the environment variables (defaults to `env`)

[See also QGIS server documentation](https://docs.qgis.org/latest/en/docs/server_manual/config.html?highlight=environment#environment-variables)

Fonts present in the `/etc/qgisserver/fonts` directory will be installed and thus usable by QGIS.

## Lighttpd

You can also use lighttpd as the web server.

The main benefit of that is to have only one running process per container, that's useful especially on Kubernetes.

For that you need tow containers, one for the MapServer and `spawn-fcgi`, and one for `lighttpd`.

The environment variable needed by mapserver should be on the `spawn-fcgi` container.

The MapServer logs will be available on the 'lighttpd' container.

Used environment variables:

- `LIGHTTPD_CONF`: The lighttpd configuration file (defaults to `/etc/lighttpd/lighttpd.conf`)
- `LIGHTTPD_PORT`: The port lighttpd will listen on (defaults to `8080`)
- `LIGHTTPD_FASTCGI_HOST`: The host of the FastCGI server (`spawn-fcgi`, defaults to `spawn-fcgi`)
- `LIGHTTPD_FASTCGI_PORT`: The port of the FastCGI server (`spawn-fcgi`, defaults to `3000`)
- `LIGHTTPD_FASTCGI_SOCKET`: The socket of the FastCGI server (defaults to `''`)
- `LIGHTTPD_ACCESSLOG_FORMAT`: The format of the access log (defaults to `"%h %V %u %t \"%r\" %>s %b"`)

## Get a stack trace in case of segfault

To get a good stack trace you should use the `-debug` image.

Run the querty that makes the server crash, then:

Open a bash as root on the container with something like: `docker compose exec --user=root qgisserver bash`, then:

```bash
CORE_FILENAME=$(ls -tr1 /tmp/|grep core|tail -n 1)
gdb /usr/local/bin/qgis_mapserv.fcgi /tmp/${CORE_FILENAME}
```

The command `bt` will give you the stack trace.

## Running the client

If you want to edit a project file, you can run the client from a Linux machine with the following command:

```bash
docker run --rm -ti --env=DISPLAY=unix${DISPLAY} --volume=/tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix --volume=${HOME}:${HOME} camptocamp/qgis-server:master-desktop
```

## Changelog

### QGIS 3.22

We removed the default values for the following environment variables to better fit with the QGIS documentation:

- `QGIS_SERVER_LOG_LEVEL`, was `0`
- `QGIS_PROJECT_FILE`, was `/etc/qgisserver/project.qgs`
- `MAX_CACHE_LAYERS`, was `""`
- `QGIS_AUTH_DB_DIR_PATH`, was `/etc/qgisserver/`
- `PGSERVICEFILE`, was `/etc/qgisserver/pg_service.conf`

## Contributing

Install the pre-commit hooks:

```bash
pip install pre-commit
pre-commit install --allow-missing-config
```

Commit message:

Add notes about the non root users

README.md, after:

# Docker image for QGIS server

## Usage

The Docker container needs to have access to all files of the QGIS project to be published.
Either you create another image to add the files or you inject them using a volume.
For example, if your QGIS project is stored in `./qgis/project.qgz`:

```bash
docker run --detach --publish=8380:80 --volume=${PWD}/qgis:/etc/qgisserver camptocamp/qgis-server
```

With the previous command, you'll get to your server with this URL:
http://localhost:8380/?MAP=/etc/qgisserver/project.qgz&SERVICE=WMS&REQUEST=GetCapabilities

Notes:

- When we run the container as root the open port will be `80`, and it will be `8080` otherwise.
- The non-root groups are currently not supported, so you can run the container with a non-root user
  like `www-data` but the group should be `0` (root).

## Apache Tunings

You can use the following variables (`-e` option in `docker run`):

- `QGIS_CATCH_SEGV`: Set to `1` if you want stacktraces in the logs in case of segmentation faults by running `tail -f /var/log/qgis.log` in the container
- `FCGID_MAX_REQUESTS_PER_PROCESS`: The number of requests a QGIS server will serve before being restarted by apache
- `FCGID_MIN_PROCESSES`: The minimum number of fcgi processes to keep (defaults to `1`)
- `FCGID_MAX_PROCESSES`: The maximum number of fcgi processes to keep (defaults to `5`)
- `FCGID_IO_TIMEOUT`: This is the maximum period of time the module will wait while trying to read from or
  write to a FastCGI application (default is `40`)
- `FCGID_BUSY_TIMEOUT`: The maximum time limit for request handling (defaults to `300`)
- `FCGID_IDLE_TIMEOUT`: Application processes which have not handled a request for
  this period of time will be terminated (defaults to `300`)
- `FILTER_ENV`: Filter the environment variables with e.g.:
  `| grep -vi _SERVICE_ | grep -vi _TCP | grep -vi _UDP | grep -vi _PORT` to remove the default
  Kubernetes environment variables (default in an empty string)
- `GET_ENV`: alternative to `FILTER_ENV`, a command that return the environment variables (defaults to `env`)

[See also QGIS server documentation](https://docs.qgis.org/latest/en/docs/server_manual/config.html?highlight=environment#environment-variables)

Fonts present in the `/etc/qgisserver/fonts` directory will be installed and thus usable by QGIS.

## Lighttpd

You can also use lighttpd as the web server.

The main benefit of that is to have only one running process per container, that's useful especially on Kubernetes.

For that you need tow containers, one for the MapServer and `spawn-fcgi`, and one for `lighttpd`.

The environment variable needed by mapserver should be on the `spawn-fcgi` container.

The MapServer logs will be available on the 'lighttpd' container.

Used environment variables:

- `LIGHTTPD_CONF`: The lighttpd configuration file (defaults to `/etc/lighttpd/lighttpd.conf`)
- `LIGHTTPD_PORT`: The port lighttpd will listen on (defaults to `8080`)
- `LIGHTTPD_FASTCGI_HOST`: The host of the FastCGI server (`spawn-fcgi`, defaults to `spawn-fcgi`)
- `LIGHTTPD_FASTCGI_PORT`: The port of the FastCGI server (`spawn-fcgi`, defaults to `3000`)
- `LIGHTTPD_FASTCGI_SOCKET`: The socket of the FastCGI server (defaults to `''`)
- `LIGHTTPD_ACCESSLOG_FORMAT`: The format of the access log (defaults to `"%h %V %u %t \"%r\" %>s %b"`)

## Get a stack trace in case of segfault

To get a good stack trace you should use the `-debug` image.

Run the querty that makes the server crash, then:

Open a bash as root on the container with something like: `docker compose exec --user=root qgisserver bash`, then:

```bash
CORE_FILENAME=$(ls -tr1 /tmp/|grep core|tail -n 1)
gdb /usr/local/bin/qgis_mapserv.fcgi /tmp/${CORE_FILENAME}
```

The command `bt` will give you the stack trace.

## Running the client

If you want to edit a project file, you can run the client from a Linux machine with the following command:

```bash
docker run --rm -ti --env=DISPLAY=unix${DISPLAY} --volume=/tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix --volume=${HOME}:${HOME} camptocamp/qgis-server:master-desktop
```

## Changelog

### QGIS 3.22

We removed the default values for the following environment variables to better fit with the QGIS documentation:

- `QGIS_SERVER_LOG_LEVEL`, was `0`
- `QGIS_PROJECT_FILE`, was `/etc/qgisserver/project.qgs`
- `MAX_CACHE_LAYERS`, was `""`
- `QGIS_AUTH_DB_DIR_PATH`, was `/etc/qgisserver/`
- `PGSERVICEFILE`, was `/etc/qgisserver/pg_service.conf`

## Contributing

Install the pre-commit hooks:

```bash
pip install pre-commit
pre-commit install --allow-missing-config
```
